---
title:  "An Angular Frontend to a Wordpress site's API"
date:   2017-02-20 10:39:00 -0600
categories: wordpress, angularjs
---

# The Situation

I'm part of a small social non-profit with a website. I'm the web/front end-ish coding person on the team. I have minimal wordpress experience but plenty of PHP (and Drupal).

A year ago, I updated the theme of the website and finding an easily customizable, solid theme was a pain in the ...butt. Every one wanted me to pay extra and under the hood, most were disappointing. I needed a slideshow, and each had a slightly different way of implementing it backed into the theme and instead of working with a wordpress plugin. Coming from Drupal land which does not have much of a theme market and the themes tend toward base themes for developers to build on top and slideshows are generally plugin/module supplied content, I was rather disappointed and general put off with themeing in wordpress. 

And never satisfied with what I did end up doing (using a base theme that was as developer friendly as I could find). In the end, I probably would have spent less time building a custom theme. So now a year later, it's time to freshen up the site again. 

I've been pondering how possible it would be to build a front end using a Javascript framework and getting information from a CMS via API calls. I decided to give it a go.


## The API

First off, I needed an supply the API. Wordpress looks like it eventually may have this easier out of the box from mentions I saw, but for my version of Wordpress, I settled on "[WordPress REST API (Version 2)](https://wordpress.org/plugins/rest-api/)." There was a few different plugins I believe, but this had the most support and good amount of add on plugins, like "[WP REST API Cache](https://wordpress.org/plugins/wp-rest-api-cache/)" which I also used (caches all the api calls and has a convenient "clear all" -- for a site where the content doesn't change munch, works well), and "[WP REST API Menus](https://wordpress.org/plugins/wp-api-menus/)", to return the navigation menu structure.

### A bit of a time sink

In order to add a calendar to the site, I had already added a plugin that provided events without considering event rest integration. Unfortunately, unlike other plugins, the one I had chosen (for it's ability to import events via ical and rss feeds) did not have any rest integration. I added "WP REST API Controller", which enables end points for custom content types, but none of the actually necessary event information was returned. I managed to find a way to add new fields to the controller's api output (via wp_rest_api_controller_rest_base filter). Looking through the plugins code, there was no clear way to load that information either (there was barely any comments and it was structured using a complicated class structure that provided no obvious way to do "given this event ID, give me a loaded event object"), so I ended up directly querying mysql per event, which I'm not particular proud about (but at least it's cached!). 

I've included my code in case anyone happens to be in the same situation.
~~~~~
/**
 *  Add events from ai1ec
 */
add_filter( 'wp_rest_api_controller_rest_base', function( $rest_base, $post_type_slug) {
  if ('ai1ec_event' == $post_type_slug) {
    $fields = ['start', 'end', 'recurrence_rules', 'venue', 'terms', 'contact_name', 'contact_email', 'contact_phone', 'contact_url', 'address', 'allday'];
    foreach ($fields as $field )
    register_rest_field('ai1ec_event', $field, array(
						'get_callback'    => 'myplugin_get_field',
						'update_callback' => null,
						'schema'          => null,
					));
  }
  return $rest_base;

}, 10, 2 );

function myplugin_get_field( $object, $field_name, $request ) {
  static $cache;
  if (empty($cache[$object['id']])) {
    global $wpdb;
    $row = $wpdb->get_row( "SELECT * FROM wp_ai1ec_events where post_id = " . $object['id'], ARRAY_A);
    $cache[$object['id']] = $row ? $row : ['empty' =>'empty'];
    $cache[$object['id']]['terms'] = array();
    if ($terms = get_the_terms($object['id'], 'events_categories')) {
      $cache[$object['id']]['terms'] = array();
      foreach ($terms as $term) {
        $cache[$object['id']]['terms'][] = $term->name;
      }
    }
  }
  return  isset($cache[$object['id']][$field_name]) ? $cache[$object['id']][$field_name] : null;
}
~~~~~

I play to resist this eventually and instead provide my own event handler, as then I can handle date ranges as query arguments to the API (right now, I grab all events -- for this organization, that'll be quite fine for the amount of events we have for years).

 
## The Front End

With the hiccups settled and the API returning what I needed, I decided to roll out an AngularJS and bootstrap front-end, as both are pretty solid and likely new people with some web experience can adjust the front-end when needed. 

I wanted to maintain many of the links, so I enabled the html5Mode so instead of the hash syntax of say, "#/events", simply "/events" works (with a small .htaccess on the apache run hosting we have to redirect any 404s to index.html to handle)

~~~~~
RewriteEngine On  
  # If an existing asset or directory is requested go to it as it is
  RewriteCond %{DOCUMENT_ROOT}%{REQUEST_URI} -f [OR]
  RewriteCond %{DOCUMENT_ROOT}%{REQUEST_URI} -d
  RewriteRule ^ - [L]

  # If the requested resource doesn't exist, use index.html
  RewriteRule ^ /index.html
~~~~~

Though that only mattered later on deployment -- I first got it all working locally. Made the development environment using [Yeoman Angular generator](https://github.com/yeoman/generator-angular) -- it gives me an easily maintainable code base with testing, building, jshint, and much much more already configured for me. 

I made a services (using angular factories) to fetch data from the API. Since again, I wanted to maintain links, I set up a router callback that fetches page based on page slug (aka page's unique URL), so all existing pages work as is (the controller/view display the content of the pages). 
~~~~~
.when('/:page', {
  templateUrl: 'views/page.html',
  controller: 'PageCtrl',
  controllerAs: 'page',
  resolve: {
    pageObject: function(ApiPage, $route) {
      var page = $route.current.params.page;
      return ApiPage.getBySlug(page);
    }
  },
~~~~~
 
I also had some other custom pages like a calendar (using fullcalendar as it's pretty solid) that I defined above it. The events I changed URL pattern for, so I added a redirect so existing links are redirected:
~~~~~
.when('/events/:event', {
  redirectTo: function (routeParams) {
    if (routeParams.event === 'calendar') {
      return 'calendar';
    }
    return '/calendar?event=' + routeParams.event;
  }
})
~~~~~

Those are likely the most interesting items I did -- the front end is fairly simple.

## Deployment

Deployment "simply" was moving the old site under a new subdomain, updating the front end's api calls to that, and uploading the new front end in the public_html directory -- if I had ssh access, I'd have configured apache instead of switching folders around, but as far as I can tell, I can't event restart apache myself via cpanel). 

But oops, the site has images and they're all have hard coded absolute urls! In this case, the site had limited content so I quickly updated the image urls to point to new image directory under the subdomain. If this was a bigger site, I'd likely have need for either a redirect or better, have the images stored in a more shared location not under the wordpress site (with a script to update the content) so going forward, there's more flexibility.

## What I dislike

Right now, we've lost the ability to preview unpublished page edits as that'd look up the live site. If that was more important, I'd have worked that into the frontend (which would require some level of authentication on the front end side and ability to say what version to see.) For such a small site, that overhead is not necessary. Also, integrating it so content links on the wordpress site directed to the new front end -- that'd make the content editor's job easier. In general, this is a bit of a loose for the content editor but big win for the front end maintainer -- which are both me currently. 

## What I like

The front end can be much easier. If I want to intergrade with other services -- for example, fetch all the newsletters from a separate site -- it's much more flexible (and arguably easier).

## Conclusion

No Regrets so far!
