---
title:  "Exploring the Wild West!"
date:   2017-02-13 16:16:01 -0600
categories: js
---

# Exploring the Wild West of Full Stack Technology 

## Venturing into the unknown

### Where I started

I started my web development career when I was a wee teenager (around 10th grade), quickly going from basic HTML & css to the LAMP stack; that'd be the stack that'd land me my first job and introduce me to Drupal content management system and the best Open Source community I've ever been part of (so far), where healthy collaboration and best practices are valued Yes, PHP land has that! Yes, we know PHP is not perfect/less ideal them much, but good shit is built on it!

Drupal open source development is rather addictive. After a few years, rolling new projects and submitting patches/features to existing I know better then the back of my hand, and contributing gave me ride -- but also gave me feedback to push myself to be a better developer.

However, I find myself getting bored and wanting to cheat on Drupal with fancy new toys -- I found the type of stuff I like developing, Drupal is not the right solution. Drupal is too much, does too much -- the micro service/use the tech that are best for the job and seperate out is what I'm drawn to.

I'm a task driven person, and thankfully my then employer had some AngularJS projects I could tackle. After leaving them, I found another AngularJS which further cementing my enjoyment in Javascript.

Now, my current state is as I need a new task/employer, but not quite sure what technology stack/open source community I want to pursue. I needed a task to help me explore, so I picked a friend's static HTML image gallery website and been using that to explore different tech the last weekish.

### Tools I brought with me

#### Yoeman

[Yoeman](http://yeoman.io/) is damn nifty. People create generators that will lay out a development environment in way they believe is a good starting point, often with testing and production build tasks already ready to use. For example, the AngularJS generator I've been using for a bit over a year, and creates an AngularJS site using NPM (to add build tools), bower (to manage css/js), grunt (to run tasks like the server, live reload on file changes, automatic jshint, and build tools like js/css minification), karma (for testing), and more, all via one simple command. Over this week, 

I've tried quite a few, and while quality and tools varied, they're generally pretty solid. The README.md's generally cover how to use the given environment, coming from Drupal where having adequate comments is big part of following coding standards, the commenting of the generated files is lacking -- looking into how it's done, those are generally copied from a repository, so should be easy to add some commenting to. However, the authors of the generators likely don't have the use case of someone new to the tech stack in mind or don't realize where commenting is needed -- I'm considering submitting issues/PRs to add some.


#### Ruby

Ruby is a scripting language that I used to scrape my friend's photo site (which for an HTML site was amazingly consistent in format). I've used ruby a few times before and find it generally easy to use, outside of remembering the day syntax and googling the libraries needed. I considered using with rails for admin area/backend part of this experiment, as I've enjoyed working with before -- I like that it's opinionated on how it works, to  keep code cleaner and easier to understand (though haven't used it enough to be confident in that statement). However, I did already have experience with it, and point of this experiment is to learn and find more of what I enjoy. 


#### AngularJS

I've been using AngularJS for myself and work for the last ~2 years and really enjoy it. It provides a good structure for front end projects and easy to learn -- though sometimes deciding what syntax and which . Also, damn $watches and other issues can cause slow down, and timing issues when trying to work with jQuery libraries can be messy.

### My Journey

With the json files I created with my ruby script, I decided to work on the front end first. 

#### The "wrong turn" -- [Angular2/Angular](https://angular.io/)

My first experiment was Angular2, which I hadn't given much thought to. Angular2 is both very similar and very different from AngularJS, so much that they dropped the JS (and the 2 shouldn't be added to projects names as they have switched to semantic versioning and Angular4 is about to come out -- [there is no Angular3 due to versioning issues](http://angularjs.blogspot.com/2016/12/ok-let-me-explain-its-going-to-be.html)). 

Angular files are generally written in [Typescript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/) then complied to JS (which can be done automatically e.g. via gulp/grunt script) to Javascript. Typescript is typed javascript, aka all variables have defined types, and and imported/exported as needed. Unfortunately, my favored IDE Coda does not have support for it, which was a pain point. My very security minded friend praises Typescript as a great for security and I can totally agree. As this project will only be consuming data via API calls, security issues via badly handled data are unlikely (outside of sanitization) though. Along with overhead in writing the typed code, there's overhead when I tried incorporating JS scripts that had not been typed yet -- have to define defination for them, which really isn't particularly hard but meant either doing it in my project or submitting PRs and using my github fork in the project to fetch the project via npm. Overall, I'd consider Typescript for projects that need it, but for simplier projects, the overhead doesn't seem worth it.

Back to Angular -- Angular2 uses a leverages a few libraries to core functionality, which I think great in "not re-inventing the wheel", but damn do the backtraces suck (long and not very informative). As far as they can tell, they haven't re-implemented the helpful error suggestions that Angular1 has.

Angular2 is also fairly new (despite Angular4 coming out soon) and looks like it add on libraries haven't really taken off yet. As my experiment has image galleries, I'd much rather use a image gallery library as a good image gallery can be quite complex to get it to look and function correctly. Neither the two angular 2 image galleries I found worked out of box, as both had been written for a different setups and non-stable versions of angular2 -- one had complied JS file that was didn't work for my setup, among other troubles. 

I managed to fix few of the bugs and versioning issues, but eventually gave up and decided to use a jQuery library. Angular is written in such a way that the project I write for the website could then be used for mobile (but whether that is easily done yet I didn't look into), but as that wasn't my use case, adding a jQuery library would not currently be an issue. That of course, didn't work even after I added the typescript defination -- the library I added relied on global variables to communicate from it's functional to visual scripts, but library got included encapsulated in such a way that jQuery call for it worked, but not the global variable use. 

I could have likely found a different library that did work or fix that issue, but that was the last straw.  In general, Angular2 felt overcomplicated for my needs and not ready for such a simple site -- for more complex site where the benefits of angular2 can be used, it's likely great.  After having some more issues, I googled to see if other's felt similar and found other's had [similar conclusions](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=13081833).

What I did enjoy about Angular is the MVC part, which provides some reasonable structure to the code. 

#### The right turn -- [React](https://facebook.github.io/react/)

Next (and current) is React. I used [arc](https://www.npmjs.com/package/generator-arc) generator to create the environment, and was able to start creating what I wanted quickly. One of reasons I choice that generator is I wanted to use use react router instead of pure history API as I like the structure it gives the code -- also, I generally prefer to use relevant libraries for core functionality as I find the handle cross browser and backward compatibility issues well.

I did have some issues getting the react modules I wanted to use setup correctly, but that more had to do with unfamiliarity with the [Webpack configuration](https://webpack.github.io/) was not set up well for those, but some googling and issue queue sleuthing fixed it (one of the tools default npm installed version had been updated to handle CSS differently but not their example webpack configuration!).

I found an image carousel and Lightbox react packages and I like and was able to get them working nicely.

The only major issue I had was installing it in a sub directory on my own website which did not work well with react routers using browser history -- again, issue queue sleuthing was needed as no relevant documentation/articles could be found. (Solution: create a custom history object with a basename configured).


#### To the back, Express!

Finally, to keep on the Javascript theme, I need a backend to create the new galleries and import the existing data. I decided on [ExpressJS](http://expressjs.com/), a framework for [NodeJs](https://nodejs.org/en/). 

I used the [express](https://github.com/petecoop/generator-express) generator with Mongoose (Mongodb) and handlebars (due to the name and icon), picked to use MVC structure to provide structure. This is one that I'd have really appreciated more code comments in the configuration -- which I had to adjust first thing to get [Passport](http://passportjs.org/) working to provide user login. 

Outside of the configuration aspect, getting it to work and due what I want has been fairly easy; which is gallery creation and uploading -- next steps, 1) having it provide an API that the front end can fetch information from (and looking into what Swagger provides) 2) importing the existing data/files. 

What I do miss that Drupal had down pat is some security issues. For example, for administrative actions likely delete links, it has easy to use cross-site request forgery protection where it adds and verifies tokens to URLS generated using site secret, as well as similar in form submissions. I'll have to look up what the best practices are that in express. With the use of templates/handlebars, XSS in express isn't much a concern (specially as only one's that will have logins are trusted). 


### Conclusion

This was a good experiment that verified that for me, it's not the language or library that matters -- each have their own disadvantages and advantages, and I can enjoy implementing in each (though some tools are incorrect for a given project, like Angular2 for a simple image gallery). 

If I'd had used Drupal for this project, I'd likely have had something up quickly that functioned well and would work for for my friend's use case -- a image gallery side like that is what Drupal is good for. However, I'd not have nearly as fun and if I wanted to take the site in a different direction, this gives me a much more flexible base. 

Though, comments people, comments! I should submit some PRs for that :).
